.\" Man page for fcitx5-vinput
.TH vinput 1 "2026-06-04" "0.1.0" "fcitx5-vinput"
.SH NAME
fcitx5\-vinput \- voice input addon for fcitx5
.SH SYNOPSIS
fcitx5 addon, loaded automatically. No standalone binary.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBfcitx5\-vinput\fP is a push-to-talk voice input addon for the fcitx5
input method framework. It captures audio via PulseAudio, performs
speech recognition through configurable ASR backends, and commits the
recognized text to the active application.

Hold \fBCapsLock\fP to start recording, release to stop and transcribe.
The recognized text is committed at the cursor position.
.SH USAGE
.TP
\fBCapsLock\fP (long-press, default 300ms)
Start voice recording. Release to stop and transcribe.
.TP
\fBCtrl+CapsLock\fP
Enter provider/denoiser switching mode. While holding CapsLock:
.br
\fB\(<- / h\fP  \-\- previous ASR provider
.br
\fB\(-> / l\fP  \-\- next ASR provider
.br
\fB\(ua / k\fP   \-\- previous denoiser
.br
\fB\(da / j\fP   \-\- next denoiser
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration files are stored in \fB~/.config/vinput/\fP.
.SS User-facing (must edit)
.TP
\fBdoubao.json\fP
API credentials for ByteDance Volcengine ASR.
.RS
.nf
{"api_key": "xxx", "resource_id": "volc.seedasr.auc"}
.fi
.RE
.TP
\fBqwen.json\fP
API key for Alibaba DashScope Qwen3-ASR-Flash.
.RS
.nf
{"api_key": "sk-xxx"}
.fi
.RE
.TP
\fBoutput.json\fP
Desktop environment for window focus switching.
.RS
.nf
{"desktop": "niri"}   \fR# niri | hyprland | gnome | none\fP
.fi
.RE
.TP
\fBvinput.json\fP
Interaction parameters.
.RS
.nf
{"activation_msec": 300, "notification_timeout": 2000, "debounce_count": 2}
.fi
.RE
.SS Advanced (optional, all have hardcoded defaults)
.TP
\fBadvanced.json\fP
All tuning parameters in one file. Sections:
.IR audio ,
.IR doubao ,
.IR qwen ,
.IR zipformer ,
.IR fire_red .
See default values in the distributed example.
.SS Audio
.TP
\fBaudio.json\fP
Denoiser selection.
.RS
.nf
{"denoise": "speexdsp"}   \fR# none | speexdsp | deepfilter\fP
.fi
.RE
.SH ASR PROVIDERS
.TP
\fBMock\fP
Returns "hello world" immediately. For testing without network.
.TP
\fBZipformer\fP (sherpa-onnx)
Local offline model (~100MB). Requires \fBsherpa-onnx\fP binary.
.TP
\fBFireRed\fP (sherpa-onnx-offline)
Local offline AED model (~1.2GB). Requires \fBsherpa-onnx-offline\fP binary.
.TP
\fBDoubao\fP (ByteDance Volcengine)
Cloud API. Requires \fBdoubao.json\fP with API key and resource ID.
.TP
\fBQwen\fP (Alibaba DashScope)
Cloud API. Requires \fBqwen.json\fP with API key.
.SH AUDIO PIPELINE
Recorded audio goes through:
.RS
.nf
PulseAudio capture
  \(-> ebur128 loudness normalization (-16 LUFS)
  \(-> denoising (speexdsp or deepfilter)
  \(-> VAD-based silence trimming
  \(-> WAV output
  \(-> ASR recognition
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/vinput/
Configuration directory.
.TP
.I ~/.config/vinput/pa_buffer.json
Auto-detected PulseAudio buffer size (created automatically).
.TP
.I /usr/lib/fcitx5/vinput.so
Addon shared library.
.TP
.I /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/vinput.conf
Addon manifest.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at the project repository.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fcitx5 (1)
